ticdc: add description about ticdc new architecture (#20597)
pingcap/docs: ticdc/ticdc-new-arch.md

---
title: TiCDC New Architecture Introduction

> summary: Introduces the features, architectural characteristics, deployment guide, and notes of the TiCDC new architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
summary: Introduces the features, architectural design, deployment guide, and notes of the TiCDC new architecture.
```

---

# TiCDC New Architecture Introduction

Starting from v9.0.0, TiCDC introduces a new architecture that improves real-time data replication performance, scalability, and stability while reducing resource costs. This new architecture redesigns TiCDC core components and optimizes its data processing workflows, offering the following advantages:

- **Higher single-node performance**: a single node can replicate up to 500,000 tables, achieving replication throughput of up to 200 MiB/s in wide table scenarios.
- **Enhanced scalability**: cluster replication capability scales almost linearly. A single cluster can expand to over 100 nodes, support more than 10,000 changefeeds, and replicate millions of tables within a single changefeed.
- **Improved stability**: changefeed latency is reduced and performance is more stable in scenarios with high traffic, frequent DDL operations, and cluster scaling events. Resource isolation and priority scheduling reduce interference between multiple changefeed tasks.

> - **Lower resource costs**: with improved resource utilization and reduced redundancy, CPU and memory resource usage efficiency improves by up to an order of magnitude in typical scenarios.

Author: ```suggestion
- **Lower resource costs**: with improved resource utilization and reduced redundancy, CPU and memory resource usage efficiency improves by up to ten times in typical scenarios.
```

> **Warning:**
>

> > The TiCDC new architecture is currently experimental. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> The TiCDC new architecture is currently experimental. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. This feature might be changed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.
```

## Architectural design

![TiCDC New Architecture](/media/ticdc/ticdc-new-arch-1.png)

The TiCDC new architecture consists of two core components: Log Service and Downstream Adapter.

> - Log Service: as the core data service layer, Log Service fetches information such as row changes and DDL events from the upstream TiDB cluster, and then temporarily stores the change data on local disk. It also responds to data requests from the Downstream Adapter, periodically merging and sorting DML and DDL data before pushing it to the Downstream Adapter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Log Service: as the core data service layer, Log Service fetches information such as row changes and DDL events from the upstream TiDB cluster, and then temporarily stores the change data on local disk. It also responds to data requests from the Downstream Adapter, periodically merging and sorting DML and DDL data and pushing them to the Downstream Adapter.
```

| Feature | TiCDC old architecture | TiCDC new architecture |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| **Processing logic driver** | Timer-driven | Event-driven |
| **Task triggering mechanism** | Timer-triggered main loop that checks tasks every 50 ms, with limited processing performance | Event-driven, triggered by events such as DML changes, DDL changes, and changefeed operations. Events in the queue are processed as quickly as possible without waiting for the fixed 50 ms interval, reducing additional latency |
| **Task scheduling method** | Each changefeed runs a main loop that polls for tasks | Events are queued and processed concurrently by multiple threads |
| **Task processing efficiency** | Each task goes through multiple cycles, creating performance bottlenecks | Events are processed immediately without waiting for fixed intervals, reducing latency |

> | **Resource consumption** | Frequent checks on inactive tables waste CPU resources | Consumer threads only queued events, avoiding the consumption of checking inactive tasks |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Resource consumption** | Frequent checks on inactive tables waste CPU resources | Consumer threads only process queued events, avoiding the consumption of checking inactive tasks |
```

| **Complexity** | O(n), performance degrades as the number of tables increases | O(1), not affected by the number of tables, improving efficiency |
| **CPU utilization** | Each changefeed can only use one logical CPU | Each changefeed can fully utilize the parallel processing capabilities of multi-core CPUs |
| **Scalability** | Poor scalability (limited by the number of CPUs) | Strong scalability through multi-threaded processing and event queues |
| **Changefeed interference** | The owner node might cause interference between changefeeds | Event-driven mode avoids interference between changefeeds |

![Comparison between the TiCDC old and new architectures](/media/ticdc/ticdc-new-arch-2.png)

## Limitations

> As an experimental feature, the TiCDC new architecture does not yet include all the functionalities of the old architecture. The following features will be available when the new architecture becomes generally available (GA) in future versions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an experimental feature, the TiCDC new architecture does not yet support all the functionalities available in the old architecture. The following features will be available when the new architecture becomes generally available (GA) in future versions:
```

> As an experimental feature, the TiCDC new architecture in v9.0.0 does not yet include all the functionalities of the old architecture. The following features will be available when the new architecture becomes generally available (GA) in future versions:

Author: ```suggestion
As an experimental feature, the TiCDC new architecture does not yet include all the functionalities of the old architecture. The following features will be available when the new architecture becomes generally available (GA) in future versions:
```

For detailed instructions, see [Deploy a new TiDB cluster that includes TiCDC using TiUP](/ticdc/deploy-ticdc.md#deploy-a-new-tidb-cluster-that-includes-ticdc-using-tiup).

### Deploy new architecture TiCDC nodes in an existing TiDB cluster using TiUP

1. If your TiDB cluster does not have TiCDC nodes yet, refer to [Scale out a TiCDC cluster](/scale-tidb-using-tiup.md#scale-out-a-ticdc-cluster) to add new TiCDC nodes in the cluster. Otherwise, skip this step.

2. If your TiDB cluster version is earlier than v9.0.0, you need to manually download the TiCDC binary package of v9.0.0 or later, and then patch the downloaded file to your TiDB cluster. Otherwise, skip this step.

    > **Warning:**
    >
    > After TiCDC is upgraded to the new architecture, rolling back to the old architecture is not supported.

    1. Download the TiCDC binary file of v9.0.0 or later.

>         The download link follows this format: `https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/cdc-${version}-${os}-${arch}.tar.gz`, where `{version}` is the TiCDC version, `${os}` is your operating system, and `{arch}` is the platform the component runs on (`amd64` or `arm64`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The download link follows this format: `https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/cdc-${version}-${os}-${arch}.tar.gz`, where `${version}` is the TiCDC version, `${os}` is your operating system, and `${arch}` is the platform the component runs on (`amd64` or `arm64`).
```

        For example, to download the binary file of TiCDC v9.0.0-beta.1 for Linux (x86-64), run the following command:

>        ```shell
>        wget https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/cdc-v9.0.0-beta.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz
>        ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
        ```shell
        wget https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/cdc-v9.0.0-beta.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz
        ```
````

>     2. Patch the downloaded TiCDC binary file to your TiDB cluster:

Author: ```suggestion
    2. Patch the downloaded TiCDC binary file to your TiDB cluster using the [`tiup cluster patch`](/tiup/tiup-component-cluster-patch.md) command:
```

>         For example, to download the binary file of TiCDC v9.0.0 for Linux (x86-64), run the following command:
> 
>        ```shell
>        wget https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/cdc-v9.0.0-linux-amd64.tar.gz
>        ```
> 
>     2. Patch the downloaded TiCDC binary file to your TiDB cluster:
> 
>         ```shell
>         tiup cluster patch <cluster-name> ./cdc-v9.0.0-linux-amd64.tar.gz -R cdc

Author: ```suggestion
        For example, to download the binary file of TiCDC v9.0.0-beta.1 for Linux (x86-64), run the following command:

       ```shell
       wget https://tiup-mirrors.pingcap.com/cdc-v9.0.0-beta.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz
       ```

    2. Patch the downloaded TiCDC binary file to your TiDB cluster:

        ```shell
        tiup cluster patch <cluster-name> ./cdc-v9.0.0-beta.1-linux-amd64.tar.gz -R cdc
```
